---
layout: post
title: "Understanding TTPs"
categories: Security
---
http://stixproject.github.io/data-model/1.1.1/ttp/TTPType/

> TTPs are representations of the behavior or modus operandi of cyber adversaries. It is a term taken from the traditional military sphere and is used to characterize what an adversary does and how they do it in increasing levels of detail. For instance, to give a simple example, a tactic may be to use malware to steal credit card credentials. A related technique (at a lower level of detail) may be to send targeted emails to potential victims, which have documents attached containing malicious code which executes upon opening, captures credit card information from keystrokes, and uses http to communicate with a command and control server to transfer information. A related procedure (at a lower level of detail) may be to perform open source research to identify potentially gullible individuals, craft a convincing socially engineered email and document, create malware/exploit that will bypass current antivirus detection, establish a command and control server by registering a domain called mychasebank.org, and send mail to victims from a Gmail account called accounts-mychasebank@gmail.com.

> TTPs consist of the specific adversary behavior (attack patterns, malware, exploits) exhibited, resources leveraged (tools, infrastructure, personas), information on the victims targeted (who, what or where), relevant ExploitTargets being targeted, intended effects, relevant kill chain phases, handling guidance, source of the TTP information, etc.

---

VERY IMPORTANT - neither of the "T"s in "TTP" stand for "tools". I'm'a smack somebody silly the next time they do that.

Also, IOCs are not TTPs.

> Tactics, Techniques, and Protocols or Procedures... either way.

---
http://www.secureworks.com/cyber-threat-intelligence/advanced-persistent-threat/understand-the-threat/

> ### Tools of the Trade

> Advanced Persistent Threat actors may use social engineering, a common tactic, to gain information from your employees that may be useful for exploit efforts. Phishing and spear-phishing are particularly effective ways to "deliver" malicious programs

> APT actors may use a number of tools throughout the lifecycle process shown above. This includes rootkits, exploit kits, downloader kits, drive by downloads, DNS and routing modifications, use of rogue Wi-Fi devices and just about any method that may prove useful. Some APT actors may also have resources to develop custom hacking tools and prepare zero-day exploits for use.

> ### How They Use Those Tools

> Advanced Persistent Threat actors often use a careful and measured process to their efforts to secure access, information or other gain. Advanced threat actors will adapt their approaches and tools based on their effectiveness against a target.

> In addition, APT actors may adapt and customize their Tactics, Techniques and Procedures (TTP) to predict and circumvent your security controls and standard incident response practices during the course of their attack and infiltration.

> In the case of an organized team, roles and responsibilities may actually be defined and compartmentalized for optimum efficiency and effectiveness.  
