I've been thinking lately about different threat models, especially those targeting a particular victim or defender. Frequently, discussions around "advanced persistent threats" (APTs) get lost in marketing FUD or military policy discussions. Despite both of these, I've previously researched the [differences in espionage incidents](http://nbviewer.ipython.org/url/threatic.us/Clustering.ipynb). The typical TTPs (tactics techniques and procedures) associated with these incidents vary significantly from those carried out by attackers with a financial motive. Some of these differences really come more from the targeted nature of these attacks.

This "targeted vs opportunistic" dichotomy in infosec applies to individuals too, not just organizations. As an example, think about the threat models of stalkers, abusers, or harassers. The typical advice given about online safety focuses on opportunistic attackers with a financial motive. If advice to individuals is based on hardening their defenses just enough not to present the easiest target, it misses quite a bit. Telling somebody they don't have to run faster than the bear, just faster than the next person, makes assumptions about the bear. Those assumptions - the bear just wants the nearest meal, the bear will be satisfied with only one victim, only one bear is giving chase - may not hold up under close examination. And they certainly don't apply to targeted attacks against individuals, **especially** against targeted attacks from relative "insiders" such as intimate partners.

Smart folks have already done great work in this area. I've started trying to catalog the available resources and look for gaps and ways to improve these resources. Just as important, of course, I want to find ways to attack this problem using the tools and skills I have available. Sometimes hackers can do more good in local communities and civil society than agitating about national policy.
